# OpenCTD : Oceanography for Everyone

There is something radical about making and using your own scientific
instruments. The structure of scientific inquiry has coalesced around a model
that is, in general, both expensive and exclusive. This centralizes knowledge
production within a circle of individuals, organizations, and institutions
which rarely reflects the breadth of identities, experiences, and ways of
knowing of those most directly connected to the places being explored.

By building your own instruments to study and understand the natural world, by
taking ownership over the tools of scientific inquiry, you contribute to
expanding that circle of knowledge production. A scientist who can make their
own instruments is not beholden to the cycles of funding and access that
pervade formal, institutional inquiry. A researcher who can build and repair
their own equipment is not dependent on the ever-changing wind of academic
sentiment to decide what is and is not worthy of study. A community leader who
has the tools to create their own data does not have to wait for institutions
to take notice of an emerging crisis before taking action. 

![The OpenCTD](Documentation/Images/IMG_20190727_150858%20(2).jpg)

**You donâ€™t need to ask for permission to understand your world.**

Nowhere is this inequality of access more pronounced than in the ocean
sciences, where all but a few entities have the capital to mount major
oceanographic research campaigns. Even localized coastal research can be
stymied by the need for vessels, equipment, and instruments, access to which is
often controlled by research institutions. As the need to understand the
dramatic changes happening both at the surface and beneath the waves
accelerates, barriers to access that precludes the participation of ocean
stakeholders further erode our potential to understand, anticipate, and
mitigate those changes. 

The ocean belongs to everyone. The tools to study the ocean should be
accessible to anyone with the curiosity and motivation to pursue that inquiry.
Chief among these tools is the workhorse of oceanography, the CTD, an
instrument that measures salitnity, temperature, and depth. By these
characteristics, scientists can begin to unlock ocean patterns hidden beneath
the sea's surface.

CTDs come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and applications. Most oceanographic
research vessels have a CTD connected to a rosette platform, which houses other
instruments and collects water samples in parallel with real-time data. CTDs
are also commonly attached to fixed moorings, autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs), remote-operated vehicles (ROVs), and, on occasion, marine animals. But
commercial CTDs are expensive, with the even most affordable models costing
several thousand dollars. For near-shore oceanographic research on the
continental shelf, where the water depth rarely exceeds 200 meters, this cost
can be prohibitive. The expense of the CTD is a barrier-to-entry for formal and
informal researchers working with limited budgets, including scientists from
low- and middle-income countries and small island states, as well as citizen
oceanographers, environmental educators, conservation and management
practitioners, and students of all levels interested in understanding their
local coasts and waterways. 

### Build Your Own CTD

The OpenCTD is a low-cost, open-source CTD designed intentionally for
budget-restricted scientists, educators, and researchers working in nearshore
coastal ecosystems, where entire research projects can be conducted for less
than the cost of a commercial CTD. It was developed by a core team of marine
ecologists in collaboration with a distributed community of scientists,
engineers, makers, and conservation practitioners. It is assembled from
components commonly available at large hardware stores or through major online
retailers. An Arduino-based microcontroller controls a battery of sensors
sealed within a PVC pipe. Power is provided by a standard 3.7V lithium polymer
battery and data are stored in  a tab-delimited text file accessed via SD card.
All OpenCTD software is released open source with no restrictions on use. 

The OpenCTD is designed to be built by the end-user, providing both access to
the tools of oceanography as well as the skills to maintain, repair, and
replace OpenCTDs. For scientists working in remote settings, where commercial
repair solutions may be non-existent, the capacity to repair the OpenCTD
in-house provides an extra buffer against equipment failure. For educators
looking for novel, in-depth, hands-on STEM experience for advanced students,
the process of building an OpenCTD offers an introduction to coding,
3D-printing, hardware prototyping, and electronics. Construction of an OpenCTD
can provide a practical foundation for courses in oceanography and marine or
environmental science. 

### Core Resources

The [__OpenCTD Construction and
Operation__](https://github.com/OceanographyforEveryone/OpenCTD/blob/master/Documentation/Complete\
Manual/OpenCTD_ConstructionOperation.pdf) manual provides a comprehensive,
step-by-step guide to building your own OpenCTD, with a standard construction
pathway as well as numerous alternatives depending on parts availability and
technical skills.

The OpenCTD core software,
[__OpenCTD_master_m0.ino__](Software/Firmware/OpenCTD_master_m0), is designed
to be used with an M0-style Arduino microcontroller, of which we reccomend the
Adafruit M0 Adalogger. 

You can find all the Arduino libraries listed in the manual, as well as
software for calibrating the conductivity sensors in
[`Calibration`](Software/Firmware/Calibration).

[__3D_Printer_Files__](https://github.com/OceanographyforEveryone/OpenCTD/tree/master/Hardware/Enclosure)
are provided for structural elements, switches, and other support structures. 

**Updated 3/17/2023**
